---
title: “The Citizenship of Heat”
story_number: 003
tags: [balkanism, identity, origin, resistance, soft-authoritarianism]
summary: "A story about identity, home and resistance thorugh remembering."
---


# 003 Title: “The Citizenship of Heat”


*Soft Authoritarianism and Other Bedtime Stories* 
*Transcript for GitHub*

Once, there was a woman who held on to her California ID like it was a passport.
She hadn’t lived there in years. She hadn’t ridden BART half-asleep with a coffee in hand or breathed in the bay air just after rain in a long time. But when the notice came—“Get your REAL ID”—something deep in her said, Don’t let go.
Not because of beaches. Not because of burritos. Because California—her California—was Oakland.
And Oakland was a country.

She remembered mornings when the fog would roll over the hills like a heavy quilt, and the air would smell like bay laurel and wet pavement. Not romanticized, not soft. Just real. Just right. A scent memory that whispered, This is where you learned to speak truth out loud.
She thought often about fracture. Not disaster movies. Not red vs. blue. The quiet kind of fracture that happens over decades. Balkanism. A nation unraveling stitch by stitch. She didn’t want to see it. But if it came, she knew where she belonged.

People mocked the coasts, called them elitist. But they never mentioned who funded the rest. She could have been petty about it, but she wasn’t. Mostly.

What she held wasn’t petty, it was sacred. The California she kept in her wallet was the one where revolutionaries taught in public schools and kids painted murals of resistance on plywood after protests. Where artists lived above mechanic shops and wrote poetry that smelled like gasoline and freedom.

She didn’t trust the government. But she trusted the ghosts of the place.
She remembered the jacaranda confetti that drifted down in summer—chaotic, purple, unbothered. She remembered the low-slung houses, the corner store politics, the hush of early morning before the city stretched its shoulders.

So she got the REAL ID. Not because she needed to—but because, when the map redrew itself, she wanted to be counted.

To say, without blinking:
“I’m from Oakland.
 I never left.
 I just went to scout ahead.”

Sometimes, resistance is an accent.
 Sometimes, it’s the way you pronounce “hell no.”
 Sometimes, it’s bay laurel in the fog and not apologizing for remembering.

